---
title: 'Last Blog'
date: 2025-12-07
permalink: /posts/2025/12/blog-post-12/
tags:
  - Last
  - Blog
  - Ethics
---

**This is my last blog post**

**1.)**
I would label ‘BIAS Blog 1: Right to Fair Representation’ as my most shocking blog post. This case study opened my eyes to the true consequences of computer science being a white male dominated industry. As a direct result of this case study, I will make a conscious effort to combat harm, bias, and stereotyping to the best of my ability when developing and working on software.

**2.)**
I would label ‘SOC Blog 1: Implications of a Tech Focus Society’ as the most dread-inducing. This case study goes into the case of Sewell Setzer, who was encouraged by an AI chatbot to take his own life. I think this case study is important because Setzer’s case is not the first of its kind. This is becoming increasingly more common and is a serious issue in the wake of the isolation brought on by the pandemic lockdown. This case study allowed me to voice my personal opinions because I was already aware of several situations where this had happened to vulnerable people.

**3.)**
 ETHICS Blog 1 was the first blog post we ever did, and also the one I had to revise the most. I guess I wasn’t used to writing in that style, so my ideas didn’t really come across and fell flat. After revising it, I didn’t have any problems with my other blog posts.

**4.)**
Writing all these blog posts really helped me find my own writer’s voice, which is a concept I vaguely remember learning about in high school. At first, it was a real struggle, since I had never written a personal blog before. It didn’t take long until I really started to come into my own and it became easier and a lot of fun.

**5.)**
Blogs are definitely the way to go, lot’s of fun and engaging. I don’t think I would have nearly enjoyed this class as much without writing the blog posts. Because writing the blogs required less stakes than writing a formal paper, I was able to focus my attention towards comprehending the case study. Blog posts felt like I was actually sharing what I learned and not just regurgitating information.

**6.)**
Sometimes when writing blog posts, I would write very casually. It was very refreshing to write what felt like my own voice, rather than the standard MLA-type academic writing style that’s expected of us.

**7.)**
We wrote a lot about AI, and incidentally, I really liked writing about AI. AI is controversial, and the consequences are often under-explored. I loved writing about the ethical concerns that are raised by AI’s rampant use in the industry.

**8.)**
I definitely think that writing and going in-depth into discussion questions helped me further develop my understanding of class concepts. I also think my habit of doing blog posts early, often before we even started talking about said concepts in class, helped me better follow along in class and allowed me to be active in class discussions.

**9.)**
I plan on developing a game-development course that I hope to upload to a similar style website so that it can reach as many people as possible. I don’t see myself continuing the blog after this semester formally, but I will continue to read and think critically about what I read.

**10.)**
I definitely see myself becoming a creative writer at some point in my life. I have always wanted to write Fantasy and Sci-Fi. I also have been exploring and experimenting with songwriting and how I write poetry, it’s been a lot of fun!

**11.)**
If I were to set one writing goal for myself next semester, it would be to write more! I didn’t realize how much I enjoyed writing until I took this course. I’ve already been finding more places that I can apply myself as a writer in my own life, and I will continue to develop my writing skills and my personal ‘writer’s voice’. 

Thank you for reading my blogs! Have a great day. : - )
-tony