---
title: 'ETHICS Blog 2: Crafting Arguments'
date: 2025-09-21
permalink: /posts/2025/09/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - argumentative
  - blog post 2
  - ethics
---

**Case Study reading:**  
[The Unnerving Future of A.I.-Fueled Video Games](https://www.nytimes.com/2025/07/28/arts/video-games-artificial-intelligence.html?searchResultPosition=10)

The Unnerving Future of A.I.-Fueled Video Games: Rebuttal
---

Premise 1: The use of A.I. by big game companies will result in more developer lay offs. Developers are concerned that usage of A.I. is contributing to job instability and layoffs.

Premise 2: There are concerns that A.I. powered NPC’s are gaining sentience and becoming self aware.

Premise 3: A.I. can be used to do menial, repetitive, and time consuming tasks, to reduce development time and make producing games cheaper.

Conclusion: The use of A.I. in video games raises a lot of ethical concerns .

P1 Challenge: This argument relies on the Red Herring Fallacy. While it may look like that AI is going to cause lay offs in the gaming industry, layoffs have already been a ongoing problem for years, predating the use of AI in games. The article claims that cuts in Microsoft's gaming division is, "a signal to some analysts that the company was shifting resources to artificial intelligence." Microsoft has undergone many significant layoffs in the past, unrelated to AI. While you can see a spike in layoffs between 2022-2025, this can largely be attributed to effect COVID-19 had on the gaming industry, the demand, and subsequent bloating in operational costs and unsustainable growth, as the world started to reopen and the market returned to pre-pandemic trends. Many developers worry about the job instability that will come with using A.I., thought it should be stated that the gaming industry has almost always been largely unstable. The gaming industry itself almost collapsed in 1983, and if wasn't for Nintendo introducing the NES (Nintendo Entertainment System), the gaming industry might not even exist today. Almost every year, companies go bankrupt and fall apart. Gaming itself is a largely unstable market, even for the big companies. 

P2 Challenge: Appeal to emotion. A.I. seems to have a human-like awareness, it is simply a program programmed to imitate people. The same way that the ghosts in Pac-Man are not alive but simply algorithm’s, NPC’s powered by A.I. are just astronomically more complex algorithms. These NPC's only "seem" to be gaining sentience. It is a carefully crafted illusion, based on sophisticated technology, with no genuine self-awareness that can be attributed to. Many people have begun to feel real emotions for NPC's who exhibit thoughts and feelings, which is nothing more than the human ability to emphathize. Nothing more than trying to use an emotional response in place of real evidence.

P3 Challenge: It is true that A.I. can be used as a means of saving on development time by doing the tasks that take developers many many hours, but the costs of using A.I. in video games, especially for Real-time dialogue writing can cost thousands of dollars daily while in operation.

R: A.I. still has a long way to go before being used widespread in the gaming industry, and hopefully before then it can be regulated. 

C2: A.I.  should be used sparingly when in the gaming industry, and resources but towards A.I. should go towards paying human developers. If A.I. is used, it should be used sparingly and consciously. There's definitely an arms-race to see which company can make the most developed and advanced A.I. for gaming usage. The industry as a whole might benefit from taking a step back and consdiering the implications of using such techology aside from how much "Wow Factor" it might have to the average consumer.

Reflection:
This blog post was a lot harder to write than the last one. I’m not very good at writing these kinds of arguments and I don’t think my article lended itself well to being refuted. Otherwise, it was a really fun assignment and got me thinking about the source material differently.
