---
title: 'INFO Blog 1: Social Media and Moderation'
date: 2025-11-10
permalink: /posts/2025/11/blog-post-9/
tags:
  - Information
  - INFO blog post 1
  - Ethics
---
**Case Study**  
[Censorship of Misinformation and Freedom of Speech on Social Media](https://mit-serc.pubpub.org/pub/lkf63cu5/release/1)

This week I read “Censorship of Misinformation and Freedom of Speech on Social Media”, written by Kevin A. I. Mills, about the prevalence of misinformation in the modern digital age, where this misinformation stems from historically, and why the seemingly obvious choice of censoring misinformation might actually cause more harm than good. To better understand the contents of this case study, I wanted to delve in and address four of the discussion questions provided at the end of the reading.

This case study discusses several examples in which misinformation appears to be worse now than it was in the past (e.g., vaccine skepticism and election conspiracies). Can you think of any other examples? How confident are you that this misinformation really is worse now?
I think social media as a whole has created the right conditions for an echo chamber of misinformation on a massive scale. I know from my own personal experience on Twitter (or X? who knows) that misinformation spreads like wildfire, and it only takes confidence to pass on blatant misinformation as factual to a large audience. It got so bad, in fact, that there's a measure in place where certain tweets will be fact checked and display whether or not the statements are true, false, or misleadingly phrased. Despite this, I can’t say for certain that misinformation is worse. I think the real issue is that we find ourselves more divided as a society than we’ve been in a very long time, but I can’t say we’re less informed. Thanks to the internet, we are as informed as ever. In the past, without the aid of surfing the web, there were very few ways of doing your own research on certain topics. It was very easy to be misled by the powers that be, whether through news media, or books. I think misinformation only looks like it’s a big issue because we’re hyper aware of its presence.

This case study discusses several institutions that help (or helped) with the production and dissemination of reliable information. What are some other institutions that do this, and are these institutions working well in the 21st century?
The government's duty to the people is to present reliable information when necessary and I’m sure we’re all aware of the current state of things. The United States Secretary of Health and Human Services has been saying some pretty interesting things lately. It’s bad enough that misinformation about vaccines has been spread through social media platforms, but head figures like RFK Jr. have been undermining measles vaccines and actively endangering the American public. It is very unfortunate that the government, which should be one of the most reliable sources of information, is spreading the same kind of misinformation spread by people from their living rooms.

If censorship were likely to be an effective tool in combatting misinformation on social media, would it be justified? Why or why not? And if so, in what cases and to what extent?
As stated in this case study, censorship is not an effective tool in combating misinformation, as censoring misinformation is not an effective method of combating the source of where this information originates from. Even if it were an effective tool, I don’t think it should be used on social media platforms. There are plenty of institutions that should fight to combat misinformation. Universities, for example, should have measures in place to prevent misleading academic papers from being released. Social media on the other hand is a place where everyone's voice should have a place to be heard equally, no matter how incorrect. I don’t think silencing people is an effective way in changing people's outlooks on subjects. If someone really, vehemently disagrees with the effectiveness of vaccines, removing their opinions from the front page is not going to change their mind. It may prevent their opinions from reaching the vulnerable, but it won’t fix the problem at the root.

What strategies can you employ to avoid falling for misinformation online?
I believe it is important to take in all information with a grain of skepticism at all times. Taking everything at face value is a very easy way to fall for misleading information. When I see a new fact presented to me through social media or a news outlet, I take the time to do a quick background check. This does not involve extensive research, just a second opinion or two. This does not mean that seeing information validating the original fact will automatically validate the original statement, but it’s often very small facts that can be corrected. For example, people love to bring up dates to certain events when arguing, which can very easily and reliably be fact checked with a few presses of a button. On more complex subjects, proving credibility can almost seem impossible, but for topics that may be important to a person, even a few digestible videos on a subject can help alleviate misinformation.

In response to these questions, I'd like to provide my own question, which I find important:
If censorship is not an effective way in combating misinformation, how would you go about monitoring misinformation on social media platforms? Do these violate free speech?

If censorship is not the solution, and it isn’t, I think it’s important to brainstorm other ways we might oppose misinformation. Misinformation seems to only be getting more widespread and normalized and the most common way it’s spread is through messages and posts on social media. I think we should seriously start considering non intrusive solutions, that is solutions that do not limit freedom of speech while still combating misinformation. With enough time, I think we will find solutions to both combat the symptoms of misinformation and ultimately get to the root of the problem.

As someone who has seen the real-time decline of Twitter transitioning to X, I think this is a very important topic. I lived through both the 2016, 2020, and 2024 U.S. elections during very formative years and I have seen the consequences that social media has had on society as a result. It should be stated, twitter was not perfect. I remember pre-Elon there tons of complaints about how Jack and the Twitter dev team handled censorship. Lot’s of people were being taken off of the website and banned altogether. I find that Elon Musk has just generally degraded X to an almost unusable state, and its censorship seems to almost always favor the personal opinions of X’s current owner, Elon Musk. The analysis of ways that misinformation has spread in the past, and the ways that politics have ultimately led to this modern age of distrust in officials and experts was super informative. I loved reading this case study.

I hope you enjoyed reading my blog post : - )
-Tony
