---
title: 'INFO Blog 2: Policies for Creative Works'
date: 2025-11-17
permalink: /posts/2025/11/blog-post-10/
tags:
  - Information
  - INFO blog post 2
  - Ethics
---
**Case Study**  
[ARTificial: Why Copyright Is Not the Right Policy Tool to Deal with Generative AI](https://yalelawjournal.org/forum/artificial-why-copyright-is-not-the-right-policy-tool-to-deal-with-generative-ai)

This week I read “ARTificial: Why Copyright Is Not the Right Policy Tool to Deal with Generative AI” by Micaela Mantegna for The Yale Law Journal. In this case study, Mantegna tackles the complex issue of GAI (Generative Artificial Intelligence) created images and how they interact with existing copyright laws. Mantegna also goes into the concerns artists have over the production of these images and how copyright laws are not the solution to solving this problem. At the beginning of the case study, a few questions are presented that Mantegna hoped to answer for the reader by the end. To gain a better understanding of the topic, I would like to answer some of these questions.

Is training with unlicensed works a fair use, or an infringing one? This is an important question since unlicensed works would not be protected under copyright laws. I do think there is an ethical issue involved if there is monetary gain involved (which there usually is). I think GAI “works” are highly infringing, even if the law recognises it as fair use. The basis of GAI images is that of stealing others' works, splicing it, and passing it off as some sort of original piece. The training process of AI is a highly intrusive one, in my opinion, especially when using other people’s artwork.

Are the outputs generated by GAI original or derivative works? Are human-made pieces of art original or derivative? I think about my own experience as a musician and artist. A lot of music I make is derived from some musician I admire, whether that be intentional or subconscious. It’s impossible to separate yourself from your influences, and some might say that art cannot be created from nothing. There’s always an inspiration whether you know it or not. The late Virgil Abloh famously coined the “3% rule”, the idea that if you take an existing idea and tweak it by 3%, you’ll have an entirely new idea to call your own. While I don’t entirely agree with the sentiment, it's true that great innovation within art can be created from just the tiniest of changes. In the case of GAI, it lacks what humans bring to the creation of art, which is intention. GAI is nothing more than complex algorithms that masquerade as creative under the pretense that its creators could not foresee every possible outcome. This intention is what makes art meaningful to me. Without intention, sure I could maybe be impressed by a Gen AI output, but without that intention the art lacks any sort of human quality that would allow me to meaningfully connect with.

Should the outputs be entitled to some form of copyright protection? If so, how should we deal with AI authorship? Absolutely not. Nope. It would be bafflingly unfair for a company to steal the hard work of others to train their GAI model, without properly compensating the parties involved, and then turn around and expect the Frankenstein-esque slop their model dumps out as being worthy of some sort of protection. I can’t get behind that. AI authorship should not be a term taken seriously. Protecting these outputs would give too much power to the absurdly wealthy companies that can fund the creation of these AI models in the first place.

Should we distinguish between autonomous and assisted AI creations? Can AI be assigned rights as an author for its contributions in some capacity? If so, where should the line be drawn? Or should all AI creations be in the public domain? · Would assigning copyright to AI works create an imbalance in the public domain due to the massive scale and velocity at which AI can operate? When I was a kid, I really wanted to be an animator. Little did I know, animation is one of the most harrowing, time-consuming, and tedious tasks that a person can subject themselves to. It didn’t take me long before I went back to sticking to focusing on one drawing at a time instead of a few couple thousand. Recently, there have been huge breakthroughs in AI tools assisting animators with the things that used to be most time-consuming and menial. I believe that it’s okay to use AI as a tool. If AI is going to be used in any meaningful way, it needs to be used sparingly and thoughtfully. I would consider this usage to be fair but still AI assisted. There should be a distinction between these autonomous, entirely AI generated images, and works that are simply assisted by AI to make the process smoother. If it were up to me, autonomous AI creations wouldn’t even exist. Their an affront to art and the human condition as a whole.

After reviewing and answering these questions, I’d like to provide my own to consider:

As GAI continues to improve, do you see it getting more difficult to distinguish between GAI and original human-made works?

I ask this question because I personally remember GAI images at its infancy a few years back. It was laughable, seriously laughable. It was fun, even. Put in a prompt and be fed a horrific misinterpretation. It used to be easy to distinguish between AI art and real art. The first telltale sign was that of the hands. AI had a bad habit of giving the hand a few more fingers than five. This was an interesting consequence of the diffusion style of generating images, since the model was fed training data consisting of tons of different angles and positions of hands. Funny enough, hands are the bane of the existence of most beginner and intermediate artists, and AI was no different. Recently though, AI has begun to improve and will generate images with mostly accurate hands. GAI only gets better everyday, and as this process continues will GAI become indistinguishable from real works? Scary!

This was an uncomfortable read for me. As an artist, and someone who's dedicated a lot of time and energy to their craft, seeing people so easily throw out artists in favor of lazy AI slop is heartbreaking but not surprising. One thing that this case study made me realize was that artists are at a serious disadvantage when trying to utilize copyright laws, whereas big companies with their access to lawyers and massive budgets can afford lengthy legal battles over copyright.

I hope you enjoyed reading my blog post : - )
-Tony
